---
author: rob
categories:
- General Stuff
date: "2006-03-17T16:25:32Z"
guid: http://eatyourexam.com/?p=27
id: 27
title: Top Ten TV Shows
url: /?p=27
---
The following are my Top Ten TV shows. I briefly explained from of the lesser known ones, and took the descriptions of the popular ones from IMDB.

  1. The 4400 &#8211; The story of 4400 seemingly random earthlings that were abducted by &#8216;aliens&#8217; (who really turn out to just be humans from the future) in the last 80 years. All of the sudden, they reappear but possess extraordinary abilities. Some are more useful than others, but all are part of a bigger plan to save the future Earth from destruction.
  2. Firefly &#8211; Malcolm Reynolds is captain of the Firefly-class ship called _Serenity_, that houses an unlikely group of outcasts and fugitives. This series takes a unique perspective on the future human-inhabited galaxy: a combination of old-west lawlessness in the &#8216;outer rim planets&#8217;, with the futuristic technology of the &#8216;core planets&#8217;. The crew of _Serenity_ will do anything to gather enough money to eat, and they get into a lot of trouble along the way.
  3. Kindred: The Embraced &#8211; Julian Luna, vampire Prince of a modern city, lets the love of a human get in his way of administering The Masquerade between vampire clans. Whether the Brujah are smashing skulls, or the Toreador are passionately plotting their ascent to fame, vampires tend to cause trouble in the city. It is the Prince&#8217;s job to set everything right. Based on the Vampire: The Masquerade tabletop RPG, this series combined masterful story-telling with dynamic characters&#8230; and it has vampires! What more could you want?
  4. Prisonbreak &#8211; From IMDB: &#8220;Lincoln Burrows is on death row for the murder of the vice president&#8217;s brother. He insists he&#8217;s innocent and only his brother Michael Scofield believes him. An engineer who helped design the prison where Lincoln is being held Michael takes drastic measures to help his brother. He gets himself arrested and sent to the same prison so that with his knowledge of the building the two of them can escape together. However while inside Michael discovers a massive conspiracy that is determined to see Lincoln&#8217;s sentence carried out. Breaking out will be more difficult than he thought, but he&#8217;s still going to try.&#8221;
  5. The Sopranos &#8211; From IMDB: &#8220;An innovative look at the life of fictional Mafia Capo Tony Soprano, this serial is presented largely first person, but additional perspective is conveyed by the intimate conversations Tony has with his psychotherapist. We see Tony at work, at home, and in therapy. Moments of black comedy intersperse this aggressive, adult drama, with adult language, and extreme violence.&#8221;
  6. 24 &#8211; From IMDB: &#8220;Season 5: 18 Months have passed since Jack Bauer stole away across the train tracks after faking his own death. He&#8217;s now living a quiet life in Bakersfield California, with a new love interest and her teenage son. But when a terrorist sniper&#8217;s bullet kills one of his dearest friends, Jack Bauer cocks his gun and heads back to Los Angeles, and another day of work as America&#8217;s most dangerous counter-terrorist agent.&#8221;
  7. CSI New York &#8211; All of the CSI shows feature a group of talented forensic scientists solving crimes with the latest technology and very complex problem-solving. Attention to detail is everything in the forensic business. Out of all three shows, which I all enjoy, CSI New York provides the best inter-character relationships and stories.
  8. Lost &#8211; From IMDB: &#8220;A horrific plane crash leaves 48 passengers alive, and stranded on a remote island in the South Pacific. The survivors include doctor Jack, now freed prisoner Kate, one hit wonder rock star Charlie, Iraqi military vet Sayid, and a mysterious man named Locke. For a while their goal is simple survival, but they soon realize that it was far more than mere chance that brought them together, and each of them has a purpose that will help them unlock the island&#8217;s secrets.&#8221;
  9. Battlestar Galactica (2004) &#8211; From Wikipedia: &#8220;_Battlestar Galactica_ follows on from the 2003 mini-series to chronicle the journey of the last surviving humans from the Twelve Colonies of Man after their annihilation by the Cylons. The survivors are led by President Laura Roslin and Admiral William Adama (previously a Commander) in a ragtag fleet of ships with the _Battlestar Galactica_, a massive warship, at its lead. Pursued by the Cylons who are intent on wiping out the remnants of the human race, the survivors travel across the galaxy looking for the fabled and long-lost _Thirteenth_ colony — Earth.&#8221;
 10. The OC &#8211; From IMDB: &#8220;Ensemble drama revolving around the young adult community of the Orange County area. A street-smart teen (Ryan Atwood) winds up in the high-class society of Newport Beach, sparking something of an edgier take on the Melrose Place-esque premise.&#8221;

These _are_ in order, as opposed to the video game list. Simply put, The 4400 is the best show ever to be on television. What started out as one of the coolest miniseries&#8217;s ever ended with a perplexing bang. I found myself immersed in woe until I heard that it was being turned into a series. The first season of the series was just as good as the miniseries, but much deeper, as it further explored the unknown superpowers of the 4400 returnees. It is without a doubt the greatest form of entertainment ever to grace a television&#8217;s screen.